Okay, good morning everyone. Welcome
back. This is lecture B7 of statistical
rethinking 2026.
I would like to jump right into
measurement models today. Um, means I'm
not going to finish file genetic
regression from the previous lecture,
but it's okay. It's in the book, but I
apologize. I think it's just better to
devote all the time today to this topic.
It's a very important topic and the
lecture after this on missing data
builds directly on it because there I
want to convince you they're species of
the same problem. Um and these are
problems that are always here and yet
it's an advanced topic which is really a
kind of educational betrayal of you that
I am performing right it's like it would
be nice to have this at the beginning of
a stats course but it's just the
computational parts are too hard right
so I apologize it's like this but it's
it's it's not an optional topic it's an
essential topic um a little bit of
bookkeeping though first about the
course schedule we are rapidly nearing
the end of the course it's terrifying
Um, and uh there's a little adjustment
just for this section because on the I
had originally scheduled your last
lecture I think on the 13th of March,
but I'd have to be in Cambridge or
rather I'll be coming back from
Cambridge. Alfredo knows why. [laughter]
And uh I apologize for that. This is
just like a scheduling conflict that I
missed. And so I will give you your
lecture on the 20th of March and it will
be your choice what I lecture on. So
begin thinking what you want me to
lecture on because I want to I'll do the
generalized linear madness lecture on
the 6th of March and then you can submit
wishes. Um, we had talked before about
like sensitivity analysis, um, prior
sensitivity, uh, sensitivity to
assumptions about compounds, uh, things
like that before. I could do that. I'd
have to make some new slides, but I'm
happy to do that. And it it it uh, who
needs sleep? Yeah. No. [laughter] Um,
anyway, so that's the bookkeeping thing.
So, start thinking about it. Now, what
do we want to do today? So remember the
core basian workflow slide that I keep
showing in different forms. Okay. So
I've added some more stuff to this. This
is how it always is with these lectures,
right? There's a new thing. What I want
to highlight now is an aspect of the
generative modeling that helps us design
statistical models that I've really
buried previously. And that is um
there's two aspects to the generative
model. If you think about the generative
model as a a a model that can produce
samples, right? you can make it simulate
data for you. We can talk about the
generative model as the natural
processes that we're trying to learn
about. But then there's parts of the
generative model which are just the
measurement process.
Yeah. That like you think about the
variables that arrive. You've got a
curated rectangular data frame. What's
in there? There's nature and there's
people, [snorts] right? Things people
have done to nature. and and you have to
deal with both of those things to do a
good statistical analysis. At least
often you do. So what do I mean? Let's
call this the measurement model. The
aspects of how the data arise um which
don't have to do with well the part of
nature that we are when we intervene to
take measurements, right? The process of
measurement. And this includes things
like simple measurement error, um biased
measurement error, selection processes
where certain uh categories of entities
just don't make it into the sample.
There are lots of reasons that can
happen. Like in public polling, people
with certain kinds of political
attitudes just don't respond to
pollsters, right? This is why polls
don't work anymore. Yeah, that's a
strong saying. Polls work less well than
they used to. People used to answer
their phones. Now if my phone rings, I
throw it across the room, right?
[laughter] Just like what is this thing
ringing for?
I use it for everything but phone calls,
right? So u but there there's selection
processes in lots of measurement. Um in
uh uh clinical trials and epidemiology,
there's this thing called dropout and
dropout is often differential. People
with different health statuses fall out
of the study and that can really ruin
your day. Yeah. In lots of ways. Um
uh there's censoring of different kinds
uh where ends of observation uh events
have still not happened. You have to
deal with that in a particular way um in
the model or you get biased estimates.
And then there's missing data and
missingness can be caused by a variety
of different things uh determined by how
we interact with the world and you need
to deal with them in different ways.
That'll be the next lecture. It'll be
all about that. Uh today I want to talk
about a simple kind of measurement
error. Uh but I want to give you a
little bit of of conceptual introduction
too about how we approach solutions
here. And this is some of you have heard
me say this before, but I'm going to say
it again. Um you must not be clever.
Avoid it at all costs. Being clever is a
trap. Right? And I say this because in
more mathematical fields, applied
mathematical fields, there's this real
premium put on appearing clever. Right?
So the the the teacher, someone like me,
will present some kind of confusing
problem. They'll even call it a paradox.
Yeah, it's great. It's a Greek word.
Sounds really smart. Uh and then they'll
do something trick that shows the answer
and you'll have this like a feeling of
of enlightenment, right? I hate this. I
really do. Uh yes, if you're if you're
really clever, you can just intuitit the
path to a solution to these things. But
it's my job to teach you not to be
clever to use methods founded on axioms
so that you can discover solutions to
arbitrary problems that appear in your
research. Okay, sorry I have to exercise
this anxiety. This is just very
important. So please do not be clever
and and like our friend the crow here,
there is a process and if you follow it
uh believe in the process, you will get
a result. You may not like the result,
right? But that doesn't mean the process
is bad because this is how research
often is, right? You you may not get
what you want out of this. Uh but you
will get what you need, right? To to
quote Professor McJagger. Yes. Um okay,
sorry. This is my sermon, but I really
believe this. I think this is important.
And to the extent that I am successful
as a scientist and researcher is because
I am ruthlessly uncver.
I just apply the actions of probability
relentlessly, coldly, bloodlessly, over
and over again. Okay? And that's what I
want to help you do. All right? Good.
Thank you for listening to me. Usually,
it's only my therapist that hears this.
Okay? So, um, measurement error, one of
my favorite topics. When I'm in
collaborations and my colleagues say
they want to deal with some sort of
mclassification or measurement problem,
I get delighted, right? It's like all
that statistical training I've had, now
I get to use it. It's really fun. Um,
that said, the the this is really the
solutions we're going to develop here
are just applications of the tools
you've already been introduced to. We're
going to have structural causal models
that we'll use to map out the
measurement process as a part of the
same causal system as all the other part
as the the other parts of the generative
model. So, it's just an extension uh of
what you've already done. And then the
computational part is just hierarchical
modeling. Yeah. But conceptually it's
going to seem a little weird and it's my
job to help you see it as hierarchical
models like before and ways to develop
the stat models directly from the
structural causal relations that you'll
draw in the graphs. Okay. So that's our
mission today. I'm going to give you one
extended example of that. Um to start
with you can think about measurement as
a descendant node, right? There's
something we'd like to measure Z or zed.
Uh but you can't. Instead, we have A,
the descendant. Um and that's not bad
because A has information about Z. So
when we condition on A, it's like weekly
conditioning on Z. But when we can
understand that measurement process
better and put it in the stat model, we
can do even better than that. Um, now
you may have heard before there's this
very common myth that measurement error
um is often quite ignorable because all
it's going to do is reduce the size of
your effect estimates. Right? You've
probably heard this. Yeah. Uh this is
false. Measurement error can do anything
depending upon how it's structured, how
how it varies across the measurements
you've made. I want to give you just an
example uh what I mean here ju just to
hold in your mind to convince you that
this is not in general true. Um let's
think about uh a simple kind of thing at
least in my field something uh we've
been obsessed with for generations now
in in social anthropology the
inheritance of inequality right so what
are the correlations between parents and
offsprings uh incomes um and uh getting
data on this is difficult actually so
let me just give you one problematize
one kind of example of this very often
it's it's hard. Um, uh, you will survey
individuals and you can get ask them
their incomes or you can get it directly
from tax receipts. Uh, but their parents
the data is going to be terrible because
that was the past. They don't have their
tax receipts. Yeah. Or that was a time
when people did all kinds of, as we say
in Germany, black work, right? Germans
here know what I'm talking about, right?
You want to avoid taxation, you just do
everything in cash. It's a huge sector
of the German economy, I think. Like we
don't even know how much of it, right?
All of Deutsche Bank actually. No,
sorry, it's Friday. But um so so people
just recall like, "Yeah, oh my parents,
we you know, we were pretty well off.
They made about this much." But they
don't really know. There's some error.
It's recall data um in both cases. Um so
you don't actually know the parents
income. Uh instead, you've got some
recall. So I'm going to put P here is
the parents income. I put a circle
around it to indicate it's unobserved.
Instead, there's descendant from it
because it's caused by it, right? It's
correlated. The the recall P star is
correlated with the true value. It's not
completely unrelated to it, but we don't
observe the true value. So, this happens
a lot, right? And there's some error uh
little EP there that is salting the
parental income recall. Now um in this
diagram this is fairly benign because
the error is just exogenous. It's not
linked to the rest of the graph in any
way. But do you really believe that?
Right. Um what happens sometimes people
have found in these kinds of surveys is
that the child's own income influences
the error. Right? So if they're better
off they tend to say their parents were
better off. Right? And if they're worse
worse off. things like that. These are
this the there's a recall bias which is
influenced by their own income.
Um so uh uh I here's just a really
simple simulation to show you again how
to connect these graphs to uh generative
modeling and to estimation.
um we generate true parental income here
just as some standardized normal deviate
and then the child's income uh is also
normal deviate with some correlation
with the parents income and here I make
it zero just for the the sake of the
illustration true effect is zero there's
no association this is not true by the
way anywhere that's ever been studied
but uh just for the sake of illustration
um and then you generate the uh recall
and in this case I I make correlated um
right so it's like 20% salted by their
own their own income just as an example
you see that uh you can play with this
code and change it around and then we
run a new law model of course um and uh
we get some estimates and we have
overestimated the uh association the
effect of parental income on child
income because of the recall bias. So if
you can model this recall process though
you can deal with things like this but
you need a measurement model that we
would add uh to the DAG to deal with it.
Um just to show you if you switch it now
so that there there is a strong
association between parent and child you
can actually underestimate.
So it isn't always one way or the other.
It depends upon the details. Fun times.
Yeah. Okay. So this is just an anecdote
to scare you. No uh to motivate you to
do the work to diagram it out and think
about it. There isn't a simple heristic
like measurement error always reduces
effects. Um let's let's spend the rest
of the lecture on this this uh
particular example which will let me uh
draw out for you how to build
hierarchical models that include
measurement error. And I'm going to go
back to this example from the first part
of the course which I know this section
has forgotten because it was like last
year for you or something. But uh it's
an example with um the waffle divorce
data set is what I call it because it's
got a column with number of waffle
houses in it. You remember this data
set. Okay. So we're not going to analyze
waffle houses but it's in the data set.
You could add that the uh the number of
waffle houses is measured without error
in this data set. But everything else is
measured with error. It's like the only
thing we know for sure in the data set
is the number of waffle houses.
Everything else is a population
subsample with some measurement error,
right? Because it's finite samples.
um associated with the population size
of each state. And I'll show you that in
a second. Uh we're going to be
interested in returning to this same
problem, this simple um uh uh
confounding problem or or mediation
problem u but now revisit it counting
for the measurement error in the
variables of interest. uh and there's a
lot one of the reasons that measurement
error is um affects the results here is
because it's imbalanced or we say it's
differential uh across units also across
variables but across units. So some
regions have better estimates than
others and when that's true measurement
error is definitely not harmless. Yeah.
And it's nice to account for it. So
let's let's draw it out. This is what
the data look like. um on the left uh
marriage rate on the horizontal and
divorce rate on the vertical. Each point
is a state in the United States and
those um uh bars vertical and horizontal
bars are the standard errors of the
measurement as given in the data set.
Right? So these are population registry
data that are published by the US
government and they come with standard
errors that are calculated from the
measurement process. Right? It's the
idea that you're trying to measure
something. you've got a finite sample uh
and then yeah you you assume things are
normal and and you pray right you get a
standard error um how do I see show you
that they vary right some uh and they
vary in a systematic way that I show you
on the right this is just divorce rate
but you could do the same for maritrate
the horizontal is the log population
size in the state and you'll see that uh
big states on the far right like Texas
and California um New York have very
small standard errors. There's lots of
data. Um, and on the left, uh, small
states. Now, this is not geographically
small, but human small, right? So,
something like Wyoming has 12 people or
something and 20,000 sheep, right? So,
there are states like that. Yeah. Um,
and those places in any particular
observation like, you know, one year,
two-year window, there may be a very
small number of these events. And so
it's hard to estimate the rate. Does
that make sense? Uh in contrast, in New
York, uh there are lots of marriages,
lots of everything. Every year, every
day in New York City, uh you can get a a
really nice estimate of any kind of
demographic rate you like. But it's
different in small states. Yeah. Like
Idaho, Wyoming, the Dakotas, those sorts
of states. Um does this make sense?
Yeah. Where this comes from? Okay.
Um
right. So let's here's the the original
DAG for this example. To remind you, A
is median age at marriage which is a
common cause we assert of the marriage
rate and the divorce rate. Um so it
pollutes the associate we want to
estimate uh between marriage rate and
and divorce. Let's focus on the outcome
right now and just do this
incrementally. There's measurement error
on on more than one thing here, but I
just want to do one piece at a time. And
this is not just for the pedagoguy of
it, but it's also when you engineer
these things. I know I've said this
before, but I'll say it again. You
should do one feature at a time. Yeah,
you're going to get cocky at some point.
You're going to say like, I've been
doing this for years. I can just write
the full model. Yeah, maybe you can.
Yeah, but trust me, I've been doing this
longer than you have and I still screw
it up. So, just one feature at a time,
please. And then test test the
integration. Do the next one. Do the
next one. It's just the way to do it.
Save you a lot of time. Okay. So what we
want to do is explicitly indicate um the
measurement process. Now uh D the true
value of the divorce rate in each state
is unobserved. Instead we have this
proxy or descendant from it uh D star.
Okay that's what we've got. Um and we
know something about the measurement
process because we have the standard
error right as I give you a column in
the data frame for that. This won't
always be the case, but this is a nice
case to to start with where we know
enough about the measurement process
that we can actually put a measurement
bound on this thing. Um, this it's
bigger than this because in principle
all these uh variables are measured with
error and so we can just replicate this
structure across them all. Don't worry,
we're we're going to do the simple thing
first, but this is in principle what's
going on. Yeah, this makes sense. Um
uh and all of the measurement processes
are influenced by the population which
is why we can use the measurement error
model to assign standard errors to each
of them because we know the population
sizes and we know the sample sizes taken
in each state and that's what allows us
to estimate these standard errors. Yeah,
does that make sense? Okay. Um this is a
symptom of what I call uh thinking like
a graph. You should avoid thinking like
a regression. This is your brain on
regression. If anybody knows this, this
is like this is like a meme from my
childhood. So, it's very long time ago.
It's this old American advertisement uh
anti-drug campaign where the narrator
would say, "This is your brain." And
hold up an egg and they'd say, "And this
is drugs." And there'd be a hot frying
pan and then they'd crack the egg in the
frying pan and it would sizzle and say,
"This is your brain on drugs." Has
anybody ever seen this? Yeah. Okay.
There's a couple of Somebody The
Americans have seen this. Um, everybody
laughed about this. This was my
childhood. It was the cold war and we
laughed about drugs, right? But uh
anyway, this is regression. This is your
brain on regression. Now, regression is
great, but you must not think like a
regression because remember regressions
don't think. Uh they just they just
measure partial associations and the the
thinking is what you impose on top using
the structural causal knowledge, right?
So the meaning of the regression
parameters comes from outside the
regression. And that's what I mean. You
want to think like a graph because that
contains the causal relationships. And
that's what we're going to do with error
as well. Um, so how do we model these
network of causes? Um, remember this is
our our base problem. I want to pair
this down just to this part of it for
now. Uh, pretend we only have
measurement error um
for uh Sorry, did I move too fast?
Sarah, you [laughter]
um uh we only have measurement error on
the outcome.
And uh we're going to make a statistical
model from this from the graph. Um
so think about this as the model for the
outcome D and we're going to have other
models as well uh uh that run at the
same time. So this is I think one of the
first examples in the course where I'm
going to do multiple equation estimators
simultaneous equation estimators because
that's what we need to do. We've got a
model for the outcome D but D is not
observed
but we're going to model it anyway.
Don't let that stop us. We're basians,
right? [laughter]
We don't need data. No, we have enough
data to impute this. So, and then we're
going to have another simultaneous
regression with the model for the
observations. And these are going to be
linked because they're going to share
parameters uh in the marov chain. Um
there's also uh in principle a model for
M because M is also an outcome. Yeah.
So, this is going to be fun, but we're
going to build up to this one one step
at a time and and I'm going to go one
piece at a time and show you how it
works. Okay, so let's start with the D
model.
Um uh so the the regression for the true
divorce rate D subi is just a Gaussian
distribution just like it was way back
in the start of the book. It's exactly
the same. Um we have a regression that
contains both uh age median age at
marriage in the state in state I and the
marriage rate in state I. Uh but we
don't know D subi. It's unobserved. So
we're going to declare it as a
parameter. Now I'll show you this in the
code when we get to it. But that's what
you want to see. Now di is it's not a
measurement because we don't know it.
It's it's it's the true value. It's just
a and when you haven't observed
something and you're a basian, you just
make it a parameter because that's what
a parameter is. It's an unmeasured
thing. Yeah. And that's the distinction.
Um
note that uh I'll say this when we get
there but it's possible to have data
sets where uh for a single regression
equation some of the cases uh the
variables are observed and in other
cases they're missing but the regression
equation doesn't change and b and basin
updating works the same in both cases
right you you just end up your outcome
becomes a mixed vector of observations
and parameters but the model runs
exactly the same and this is a really
nice trick right again you just follow
the axioms trust the crow. Yeah, that's
a question. [clears throat]
>> So, sorry. So, if you have seen uh you
have observed some variables, so some
some observations in the variable D and
you have not observed others. Um how did
this relate in any way or because I
don't see that for the for the model
that you show does this relate in any
way to human markoff chains? Could you
could you implement this into this as
well?
>> It's a different rational I know but
it's kind of the same.
>> Yeah. Yeah. There's definitely
definitely a similar motivation
absolutely with hidden. So the question
I don't know if the mic picked it up is
about the relationship between this and
and hidden markoff processes. Yeah. And
a hidden markoff process again. Yeah.
Exactly. There's a true state. You can't
observe it. You have emissions. We were
I was taught to call them. It's a
terrible word. Sounds like pollution.
But emissions from the hidden process
and we use those to make inferences
about the hidden process. Usually the
emissions are not direct descendants
though, right? because that's it's
trickier even in a in a hidden markoff
process but in principle it's the same
idea. Um absolutely and and
statistically you can think of it as if
you once you make this into a dynamic
time series you have a hidden markoff
process.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um okay where was I?
Yeah. And then the dar regression uh is
also a linear regression actually. uh
dst star uh is going to be the true
value plus some er some deviate some
residual that is drawn from a normal
distribution with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation that we have measured
that we have a data column for that I'm
going to call s subi
right that's the measurement error that
we have estimated for that does that
make sense uh and these are two linear
regressions and they share a parameter
do you see it it's d subi
yeah the mean of the second one the
regression for D star is D subi and then
we're going to estimate that mean and
then that estimate of the mean is going
to be the outcome for the top level
regression but of course it will be a
distribution because we won't be able to
identify a unique value for it but
that's okay that's totally fine the
markoff chain will run yeah remember
trust the axioms
it works um
right um so here I I'll compress it I
should have advanced this to show you,
right? So the the bottom and once we
once we move the linear model inside the
normal distribution, it's just a linear
regression with a mean d subi.
Right? The true value which we have not
observed is the expected value of
attempts to measure that thing. We've
observed one case of it and we've got an
we've got an a measurement of the
standard error. Um and it turns out
we're going to be able to use this to
get a posterior distribution for d subi
just like you get posterior
distributions for the mean all the time.
in a linear regression. So it's not
mystical, right? It just seems weird
like you're breaking the law somehow.
Yeah, because D subi is a measurement
but you're not. All right, here's the
code. I'm going to walk this is I'm
going to walk through this just one step
at a time and we're going to increment
this code as we add more measurement
error for other variables into it. So um
but I'll go slow in each step. Um the
top of this code I just set up the data
list. Uh only thing I want to point out
here is that um we've got the uh um uh
standard deviation for D, right? It's
it's a it's a column in the data frame.
Divorce
is the reported standard error for each
state. So I just pull that in.
Um uh and I'm standardizing the
variable. So I you need to standardize
that also, right? So it's on the same
scale after things are restandardized.
That's the only trick here. Uh and then
the code here's the um model for the
observations dubserved.
Now I'll show you what uh D observed is
a is the column in the data table that
we have right the observed value. Um and
the mean of this is dc true which is a
parameter that I'm about to declare. And
then d standard deviation is also data.
Um here's the vector. I I declare a
vector of length n. There are n states
called due and each of them is drawn
from a normal distribution with some
mean which is the average across states
and some standard deviation across
states in these true rates. This is a
hierarchical model, right? This is a
hierarchical prior.
Good. Yes, it's mind-blowing. That's
what the GIF is for. Yeah, it's
mind-blowing. Okay. It's very satisfying
animation. Um, and then if you run this,
it samples fine. Uh, you can dump the
precy table, but do not look at these
things. This is you get like now there's
an estimate of the true uh divorce rate
for every state, right? They're
posterior distribution for everyone. And
they're all over the place for multiple
reasons. they they're tracking the
original measurement, but they're also
being pulled by the regression line,
right, for the second regression in this
Markoff chain because there's shrinkage,
right? The ones that are really far from
the regression line are going to move
more unless their standard deviations
are really small, unless they're
measured really precisely. But if you're
Dakota, North Dakota, uh then you're you
have a big standard error. And if you're
far from the regression line, the the
posture distribution is going to want to
pull you towards it. Yeah, you're going
to get differential shrinkage based upon
the precision of the measurement. So,
let me show you that. Okay, here are the
raw um the observed ones. This is just
the bariate relationship between agent
marriage and divorce rate. You know,
this is strongly negative. Um and uh
there's some uh regression between these
uh uh that we could observe. Now, I've
I've tried to make an animation to go to
the shrinkage estimates. So, this let's
see if this works. Yeah. Oh yeah, there
we go. Okay, so these are the shrinkage
estimates. Um, and we can look at them
both and draw lines between them. So
we're just getting shrinkage on divorce
rate because we've only measured we've
only modeled measurement error on
divorce rate so far, right? So there's
only vertical shrinkage here and uh the
black points are the observed ones and
the the red points are the posterior
means um after after estimation and
you'll see that they are shrunk towards
the regression trend. Yeah, but
differentially the ones that are further
away shrink more. And it also depends
upon the measurement error in each
state, which I'm not showing here. That
would be a bit too much put on the
graph. But this pattern of shrinkage is
a mix of the the extremity of each
state's observation from the trend and
the precision on each measurement. The
really precise measurements aren't going
to shrink very much because the you're
the model's really sure about them.
Yeah. Even if they're far from the
regression trend, but the ones that are
imprecise can move quite a lot. And
that's what you get like in the lower
left there. Does this make some sense?
Yeah, we're not done. Um, this this has
a very small effect on the overall
measured trend, right? You'll see that
there's a little difference between the
pink bow tie and the the light dashed
bow tie which was just in the raw data.
So, the trend hasn't moved a lot here,
but the individual estimates have moved
a lot. Yeah. So, if you don't care about
the individual estimates, you're like,
"Well, thanks Richard. You just wasted
my day." Yeah. But the trend can change,
right? And even if the trend doesn't
change, we do the right thing because
it's the right thing, not because it
makes a difference. Yeah. That's that's
a lesson in life, in all walks of life,
not just science. Yeah. You want to be
able to say that you worked hard, it did
the right thing, even though it didn't
make a difference, but you wouldn't know
if you hadn't tried. So remember the
crow, right? Okay. Uh let's expand this
DAG. Um I'm making good time, so I can
even slow down a bit here. So uh let's
let's model measurement on measurement
error on marriage rate as well. This is
symmetric
um in in the DAG
and we've got an unobserved true rate of
marriage M. We have the um uh uh
observed with error rate of marriage in
each state M star and the uh measurement
process little EM which gives us the
standard errors on each.
uh again we're going to decompose this
into separate regressions that we're
going to put in the same Markoff chain
and they're linked by parameters right
so it's actually like one massive
multi-equation regression if you prefer
to think of it that way but it's it's
easier to construct it if you engineer
it as separate models so
[clears throat and cough]
again these are the models we've already
had uh we have the the model for the
true d subis and we have the model for
the observed um d stars uh and then we
can add to this two more models. Yay. Um
there's the model for M subi, the true
unobserved
uh marriage rates. Uh and that
regression you get it from the
structural causal model, right? So it's
influenced by a subi. So it's a simpler
regression because that's what this the
DAG says it should be. You see that?
Right? it's predicted just has some mean
alpha subm and then there's some
association with with median agent
marriage in each state and then on the
left in black we have the model the
measurement error model for the observed
mars
just like the dstar model but now with
I've invented a new variable t subi
which is the standard errors for um for
uh this variable for the mars
Good. Yeah. Um it's like fractal
structure, right? You you've got this
way to build up to solve the problem
here and you just have to keep repeating
it and trust the process. And now ulam
code again is part of this. We we
translate this into
a probabilistic model.
And uh it's bigger now, but all the
pieces are here. So I'm going to go
through this one piece at a time. All
right. So at the very top again this is
what we had before we've got the Dstar
model the observation model for the
divorce rates. Now remember where D uh
standard deviation is observed in this
um then we've got the D true model again
this is just like before
but what's different you may see it
already is before we had the observed
marriage rates in this regression
but now we're using the true ones which
are unobserved because we want to do a
regression on the true marriage rates.
when we predict the true divorce rates.
So you see d sub m subtr in the equation
from mu. Yeah, those are unknown now.
They're parameters. They're going to be
posterior distributions for them that
are used in the regression. And that's
what's new here because we stopped
pretending that we knew the marriage
rates. Yeah, does that make sense? So
this is a fun regression where the
outcome and the predictor are both
parameters.
Are you having fun?
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. No,
but you are. You're really having fun.
Yes. Okay. This is totally fine. And not
only is it fine, it's what you have to
do. This is the correct thing to do
given the DAG. Okay. This is what you
do. Um I I've said this in many examples
uh because I believe it's true is that
um the structure of the model uh exists
independent of your sample. Right? So
the the DAG gives you the structural
relations that you believe in. That
structure is your estimator. Um if your
sample was two observations, the model
is still the model, right? And that's
the nice thing. That's one of the things
I love about the basian formalism is you
can work with really small samples. Yes.
You need informative prior, but you can
work with them. Yeah. So this is why
like in in in astrophysics, it's really
nice to be basian because you know
you've got a few estimates of the mass
of a black hole. You're it's really hard
to get another one, right? You're not
just going to go out and sample black
holes whenever you want. You want to
make the best use of the data you can
and you want a transparent uh framework
for talking about how much priors
influence those results. Um here there's
lots of data. Uh it turns out and this
is not going to be a hard estimation
problem even though it seems ridiculous
uh if you have a classical regression
education to have a regression where
both the the outcome and the predictor
are unknown. Right? But we they're not
completely unknown. we have descendants
of them, right? So, we're just being
explicit about the measurement error
now, right? But it's not that we don't
have any information about these
variables.
Uh we have a lot actually. Okay.
Um then there's the observation model
for the marriage rates MAR.
Uh this is not complicated. Yeah, it's
just like the model up top for D. Yeah,
I say that but I should look at you and
ask. Yeah. Is this okay? Okay. Um and
then again we've got a vector of length
n m trus. Um and these have this has
another mean and that mean contains uh
the median age at marriage which we're
still pretending to know with certainty.
Yeah.
Good. You like this? Yeah. I know it's
like the crow. Remember the crow
cartoon? Okay. That's I I like that the
cartoon is there for a reason.
Emblematic of this lecture. You trust
the process. You follow it. You may not
enjoy it and you may not enjoy the
outcome but it is nevertheless the
correct process. Yeah, it's just how it
feels to do research quite often. Okay,
now we get shrinkage in multiple
directions.
[cough and clears throat]
Um we've got uh again observed values um
and posterior means
um uh and we've got shrinkage. I'm
showing divorce rate and marriage rate
again um uh not again now I'm showing uh
marriage rate on the horizontal uh
standardized and divorce rate
standardized on the vertical this is
case there's a strong positive
relationship um in the data and there's
tons of shrinkage towards the trend
because those extreme some of those
extreme ones like in the upper left I
forget which state that is it's very
imprecisely measured and so relative to
the other states and so it gets shrunk
dramatically towards the regression
Yeah, the model just doesn't believe it.
Now, as always with shrinkage,
um I like these sorts of plots, these
shrinkage plots, and I think they're
very important part of your workflow
because sometimes shrinkage is bad.
Yeah, I say that again after after
months of pushing shrinkage on you or
whatever, sometimes shrinkage is bad.
So, you want to see how much is there
and then you go back to the extreme
cases and ask yourself, do do I really
want the model to shrink that? Yeah. Uh
because sometimes it could be well yeah
you you don't have a very good estimate
for that state but you may know other
things about that state which make it
plausible that it really has an extreme
value. Um for example Utah in this data
set does have an ex doesn't fit the
general pattern. Uh but I have I have
spent a year in Utah and let me tell you
I think it's true that the pattern is
different. Yeah Connor knows what I'm
talking about. Right. If you spent much
time in your life around LDS folks, some
of the best folks that I' I've had the
pleasure of being friends with, yeah,
their culture is different and they
don't divorce. Like, it's just a
different culture. And uh so things like
that, these shrinkage plots, don't just
trust them. It's a case to interrogate
the pattern and ask if you want it uh to
be in there. But this kind of shrinkage
trap can appear in lots of data sets,
not just ones like this. Um uh I could
go on endless example. Alfredo has a
question.
>> Yes. What if you had info for states but
not for others. Can you trade like not
all of them?
>> Yeah. So
>> say I know about Utah so I want to trade
Utah but I don't know rest. So I want to
train all the rest. Can you do that?
>> Yes you can do that. Yes you can do
that. Um there are cases I mean you want
to have strong justifications for things
like that. Yeah but absolutely we can do
that. And um uh there may be cases where
it it comes from a decision-making
framework like there are certain kinds
of risks in decision you want to avoid.
In this class I haven't been pushing
posterior distributions forward into
costbenefit functions to make decisions
but there's lots of people like that's
their life. Like are you going to you
know roll a medication out to the
general population or not? That's a
costbenefit decision. Yeah. And that's
so there are people that work on those
sorts of things. Or uh Moneyball. Do you
ever watch Moneyball? You know what I'm
talking about? No. So, people know
Moneyball. Um, Moneyball now is just
like it was a movie. It was a book uh
about baseball analytics, but now it's
sports science is is infused now with
lots of sophisticated statistics
informed decision-making about who to
recruit and what sorts of plays to do.
And and sports has become really data
driven in in the last generation. It's
been a huge change. And I I have a bunch
of colleagues who who work for different
professional sports teams. They're
statistitians and we swap tips and
stuff. It's very if I wanted to make
more money, this is what I do. Yeah. But
um uh no, it's they have tons of data.
It's like a statistitian's paradise. And
uh there's tons of situations like this
where you worry about shrinkage because
there's some new player who's really
hot, say, and but you don't have a lot
of data on them, but they're like two
standard deviations out and you're like,
should we recruit this person? and your
shrinkage model just says, "Nah, there's
just too little data." That is not the
way to do it, right? You want to decide
as the owner or the coach if you're
willing to take a bet on that. Don't
trust the shrinkage, right?
that maybe that that helps some of the
sports fans, but if you see what I mean
about it, but there's lots of situations
like that where once it becomes to some
sort of risk tolerance and uh how much
one kind of error hurts you versus
another and usually there's an
asymmetry,
right, in classification error. Um, then
maybe you're willing to take the the bet
on the new player who's coming out of
training and just has an insane batting
average or test average if you like
cricket, that weird sport called cricket
that I know some people like or rugby,
right? A way to kill young men. Uh,
yeah, American football even worse.
Yeah, it's those sorts of things. You've
got someone coming out of training,
they're two standard deviations better.
Um, is they might regress to the mean in
their first season and you made a
mistake. Uh but maybe uh you're willing
to take that risk. Sorry, this has been
an extended example, but I've thought
about this a lot. Yeah. If I ever start
a sports team. Yes, Connor.
>> So, in order to single out like some
data point that you don't want to
shrink, would you just give it like a
separate sigma or like have each one
have it own sigma and this one?
>> Yeah, you could do it. You could do it
with prior. Absolutely. That'd be the
most direct and transparent way to do
it. Absolutely. You could also just pull
it out of this out of the the
hierarchical prior and give it a
separate prior that's not pulled. Yeah,
you can just you can just carve it out
just like rigs it. Yeah, but you can
also just apply a separate prior on top
of that one uh and do it that way too. I
should make an example of this. That's a
good prompt for me to do. Yeah. Was
there another question there or no?
Okay. Does this make some sense? Yeah.
Well, I made great time today. This is
this is amazing. Um so, let me show you
what this does. Now in this case this
does change the regression relationship
in this case. So the the posterior
distributions on the right of this slide
um the the horizontal the top is the
effect of a on that is median age of
marriage on um divorce rate and the
bottom is the effect of marriage rate on
divorce rate. And the gray posterior
distributions are the original when we
just ignore the error, the measurement
error. And the red ones are when we
include it. Yeah. So I want you to
notice that one of these is moderated.
That is the top one gets closer to zero
and the bottom one is increased.
Yeah. Moves away from zero. Uh and this
is a complex uh result of all of these
forces together. The differential
shrinkage uh the the differential
measurement error um that shifts the
regression lines uh in the different
places. Yeah, you notice they also get
flatter because there's uncertainty
added which again is not a happy outcome
but it's the right thing to do. It's
like the crow's snow snow mess right
snow sculpture or whatever it was. It's
just it's what you needed. That's what
you needed to know. Okay, is this good?
Um, I actually have uh this is great. I
have 15 more minutes and I have extra
content. I was planning only to get
here. So, um, let me try to summarize
this and then and then I'll talk about
the extra content. Uh, so
um yes uh uh this is the summary of what
I just said I guess. Yeah, sometime you
include error it sometimes increases
evidence for effect sometimes it
decreases it. Uh why? because there's
downweing of unreliable estimates and
previously the unreliable estimates had
a big effect. They had big leverage on
the regression trend in this. Yeah, this
is a a common thing to you really want
to deal with when you have differential
measurement error. The units have
different precisions on them. That's one
kind of differential measurement error.
Uh if the measurement errors were the
same in all states, you wouldn't
anticipate something like this, right?
Because after shrinkage, it's it's just
their distance from the regression line.
So, uh the effect would be much more
predictable.
Um okay so this this is back to the the
workflow. Um different measurement
models mean different things that happen
in the stats model. Uh so uh what I've
talked about here for today is basically
just the simplest kind of measurement
error. It's symmetric unbiased
measurement error on some something like
a rate uh or any kind of population
parameter. Uh there could also be
measurement bias. If you know enough
about the process that you know the
direction of the bias, don't lose hope.
You can model it. Yeah, there's no
reason that you can't do that. Um
selection effects as well uh where
certain uh classes uh are are less
likely to make it into the sample. If
you can postulate that as a causal
model, you can put it in the stat model.
There's no reason not to do that.
Political scientists who specialize in
polling worry about this a lot. Yeah,
quite a lot. um non-response bias uh in
polling. Um dropout uh similar kind of
thing. There's a bunch of uh time series
data sets. We work on some of them in my
department. Um Jeff works on them. Uh
these things where you've got dropout.
Uh you want to correctly approach Sarah,
you work on stuff like this too. Yeah.
This is the you and Jeff have been
working on this actually. Um so you know
all about dropout. Yeah. You got to deal
with it properly or the estimates are
wrong. But you can deal with it if
you're willing to make some assumptions
which are probably correct. Yeah. But
you need to model it. Um let's think of
the Hecman, right? You're doing a Hecman
model. Yeah. So this isn't even a new
thing to do and it's really worth doing.
Uh sensoring in survival analysis,
another kind of measurement error
process we model. Um uh so what does
this mean? You've got some latency to an
event, right? That's what usually a
survival analysis means. A time event
analysis. Um, and the example that I've
talked about, uh, not in not in this
year, but in previous years, is black
cat adoptions. Some of you have seen me
do this example. This is a data set that
I like. It's a real data set from the,
uh, Austin, Texas animal control thing.
You can go to their website, at least
you used to be able to, and download all
the intakes and outtakes of all the
animals. And there's all kinds. It's
like Noah's Arc in there, right? just
like everything from ferrets to parrots
to lizards, just everything. I subseted
the cats at some point and downloaded it
all. And the question is, are black cats
discriminated against in adoptions? Um,
the answer is yes, unfortunately. So,
adopt a black cat, but um uh love your
black cats. It's it's nature's optimal
color for a cat, right?
I believe that.
And the other one the other cats are
too, you know, they they're not as well
camouflaged in in an urban environment,
right? But but we like their their
appearance more. Orange is the worst.
It's just like really a problem. Orange
cats have other problems. Everybody
knows I should stop talking about cats.
But anyway, so in that the outcome
variable is the time to adoption, but
they're censoring, which means we for
some subset of the cats, we don't
observe them ever getting adopted. And
that could be because they die uh before
they're adopted, right? But that doesn't
mean they couldn't have been adopted. So
that's a censoring event. Some of them
um it's just when I downloaded the data
set, they were just still there waiting.
That's another kind of censoring. And
then some of them actually escape.
There's a code in the data set for
escaped cat. Nobody knows where it went.
It was just gone one day, which I love.
Be free cats. Be free. But that's not an
adoption event, right? So those are
censored events. You can't drop those
cases because it biases the estimate
because it'll make the estimate too
short, right? Because there were all
these ones that were waiting and the
event didn't happen. If you just
conveniently drop all those, it'll it un
it it biases the estimate of the rate um
so that the rate's too fast, right?
Because the durations are too small.
Yeah, you're subsetting the data to to
observed events. Um this is like missing
data. You can think about each actual
time of adoption as being something that
would have happened in the future that
you haven't seen. It's a missing
observation and you can put in the
sensoring model and estimate it as a
parameter actually. And that's what I do
in the black cat's case study. Yeah.
>> Sorry, I'm asking too much to ask.
>> No, no, now that you're talking about
sensoring, um there is one thing that
that that's been bugging me for a long
time. So, say that you have because this
is usually used in in survival models,
right?
>> Yeah. Say that you have um a set of
samples in which you know when they
start when you gather that data for
clinical study for example you know that
some of them 2016 some 2017 some of 2018
but all of them are censored
>> is is that so if all of them are
censored you cannot compare the sensor
ones against the nensor ones so would
that invalidate the whole model
>> no I mean I that's a great question so
again if the microphone didn't pick it
up this is a question about what if
you're doing a survival model and you've
just kind of started the study and every
none of the events have happened yet.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Yeah. But can you make an estimate?
Absolutely you can. Again, this is goes
back to Richard's principle of ruthless
basianism, which is the model is correct
regardless of the sample.
Right? The causal model tells you the
structure of the stat model and your
sample may suck, but it's still your
sample and you must go to war with the
sample you have, not the sample you wish
you had. And that's my feeling now. But
there's information in that. The fact
that the events haven't happened yet
puts a bound on the rate,
right? So, it's not useless data. And
and this is absolutely true. My
colleagues who work in those areas,
they'll do rolling analyses because if
there's a big therapeutic effect and you
detect it early, you stop the trial and
you give everybody in every arm the
treatment. It's the only humanitarian
thing to do. So, it's extremely
important to do rolling analyses in
those kinds of studies. In anthropology,
no one cares about our results, right?
like there's no human welfare at stake
for us. So relax. But [laughter] but no,
I know a few of you work on stuff that
does have welfare impacts. So you're
you're you're more in that area. But
human evolution, h it's very relaxing
life for me. But uh but that's a great
question, Alfredo. Yeah, absolutely. And
um there's tons of there's tons of
things like this too with um uh
experimental designs that accidentally
produced a huge excess of censored
observations. So like uh sorry I'm
eating up all the extra time for extra
content telling stories but so back when
my previous job in University of
California Davis uh Davis is is a big
ecology population biology school it's I
I joke it's like the the densest
concentration of ecologists on the
planet uh ID would be the second highest
probably but Davis is higher and you
just like I mean the the the ecology
graduate program which I was a member of
had over a hundred faculty members doing
some kind of ecology ology. And so
anyway, I have these colleagues who
would do all kinds of stuff with animals
and plants, all kinds of ways just to
measure things about their phenotypes.
Um, so with animals, there were there
were multiple labs that got interested,
whether it was fish or spiders or
whatever, in individual differences and
the ecological consequences or
population consequences of individual
differences in phenotype. Um, uh, you
could call it personality, but we want
to avoid that word for animals probably
so that we're not anthropomorphizing too
much. uh behavioral syndromes is another
term and this became like a publication
craze for a while there and people were
doing this. Um it turns out to be hard
to measure the personality of a spider,
right? So one of the things you can do
is you can put them in a box and then
open the box and time how long for they
for them to come out of the box. Some of
them never come out of the box like you
are bored and you're done for the day.
The spider's still in the box. It's a
censored observation. So first time
people try to run these things on a new
species like you get 80% censored values
and then you know the colleagues come to
me oh my god what am I going to do and I
said just analyze it I mean you've got a
bound [laughter]
it's not the best experiment you
probably want to shake the box I don't
know [laughter] I mean obviously that's
not the result but but the data are the
data and they still have value so even
if they're going to run the experiment
again um and and in a way to have less
censoring
But they shouldn't throw away the
original data is what I argued. It's
still data and it will inform your
estimates
>> because this is so useful for radio
carbon dating if you want to know how
much it lasts.
>> Yes.
>> Because we know when we pick it and we
know when it was positive but we don't
know how much it would have lasted.
>> Yeah. That's a great example. Yeah.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Radiocarbon dating is a very good
example of these kinds of things.
Absolutely. And as you know basian
inference has revolutionized radiocarbon
dating. This has been a huge improvement
in dealing with the kinds of measurement
biases and the asymmetries and and
things and sensoring effects. Okay. Uh
now I only have five minutes. Um what I
wanted to talk about and I put these
slides in here in case I had time and I
can just motivate it maybe is this study
I did with Brook Shelza. Uh Brooke is a
colleague of mine who works in um
Namibia, Northern Namibia, uh the Kakovt
um with a group of people called the
Hima. Um, I'm gonna have to go through
this a little bit fast. Sorry. Uh, so
the HBA, they're Bantto pastoralists.
There about 50,000 of them. Um, and they
live in a big territory. Uh, 50,000
square kilometers. So that's one square
kilometer per person. Yeah. It's very
roomy. Yeah. Um, they're very
interesting to anthropologists because
they have a a kinship system called
bilineal descent, which is very rare
globally. In bilineal descent, you track
descent both through your mother and
your father and and there are
differential obligations that pass
through those things. So in the Himba in
particular, wealth flows through your
mom's family. They're matrineal for
material inheritance, which is not
unusual globally. There are lots of lots
of regions of the world, even Africa,
Central America, where that's the norm.
Um, and through the father's line, you
inherit religious obligations and duties
and rank like the right to perform
certain rituals. Um there's also
territorial things involved in here, but
it would be an hour to tell you all the
cool stuff about the HIPA system. Okay.
Um the other thing about them that's
famous is they have open marriages. Uh
there they have marriages. Uh marriages
entitle you to inheritance, right? Who
your who your uh official social father
is social and social mother. Um but uh
husbands and wives cannot restrict their
spouses from having sexual relationships
outside of marriage and most adults do.
Yes. And they have perfectly normal
divorce rates. This is right.
Anthropologists are like, "Yeah, sure."
Most people are like, "It's scandalous,
right?" But this is so they're a fun
group. Um and this is what this graph
is. Uh Brooke has a series of really
nice um papers on this. Uh, okay. So, I
got involved in this because they wanted
to um do paternity testing on the HIMPA
to see what proportion of kids were
fathered by these extrammarital
relationships. Not because they're bad
or anything, but because people will
assign this in the community. It's an
open thing that some of the kids were
fathered by boyfriends out, not the
husbands. And that's fine. The husband
still has an obligation to support those
kids, and they do. Uh, but we wanted to
see if they're good at those guesses,
right? So, um, uh, Brooke worked, Brooke
has been working in this group for
years. She has their trust. It was all
done in a double blind way. So, she
doesn't know the results. I'm the only
one who knows because I'm the
statistician, [snorts] right? Did I put
the table together? Um, uh, so there was
a whole informed consent thing about
this. It was a lot of fun to do. Uh, the
problem is that the genetic paternity
classification thing is not perfect.
This is a micro satellite technique, I
believe, and it has about a 5% false
positive rate. Okay, so we know that as
a part of the measurement process. So
this is a mclassification problem. So my
job was to take the raw data and correct
it for the false uh the false positive
rate. How do we do that? Um
okay, so here's the DAG, right? What
we're what we're looking at here is we
have uh uh outcome of interest X extra
pair paternity. Um this is determined
both by the mom and the social father uh
and the dad. It's like a social network
model, right? Because we want to cluster
on diad because some married diads might
have different extra pair paternity
rates than others. Now, that was one of
the things because there's multiple
kids, remember? So, it's a hierarchical
model. Um, and the thing is we don't
know X. It's just like the previous
thing. We we know XAR which is what the
genetic protocol has told us. And we
know the measurement error on that.
Yeah. which was measured clinically by
doing these things over and over again
to get the mclassification rates and
comparing to known pedigrees. So we know
the measurement error rate with pretty
good certainty. So we can build this up
as a generative model and I have exactly
one minute to do this for you so I
apologize. Um but here's the idea. X
subi is a a Bernoli variable. It's a 01.
It's an indicator of extra pair
paternity. Okay. Um this is logistic
regression. We've got some base rate
alpha of extra pair paternity. We're
going to try to estimate in the
population [clears throat]
and um that's kind of the target of
inference here, right? Is to get that uh
and then we're going to cluster by moms
and by diads because moms have multiple
kids and there are multiple kids within
each diad. Uh women do get divorced and
remarry. So mom and dad are not always
the same thing. Yeah. Um and the
measurement model is the fun part I want
to motivate for you. uh there's a
relationship between um xstar and x that
we can talk about in terms of the
averages right we don't uh our interest
is not actually assigning what's the
true value of x in each case but just
correcting for the mclassification
problem and here's the intuition I want
you to get um so if we observe xstar
equals 1
uh conditional on some rate of of extra
pairnity p subi or p sub i in the loget
there it's the probability of extra pair
paternity it's the same symbol um there
are two ways that could happen
it could be because there really is
extra pair paternity p subi or because
of mclassification and the
mclassification rate is f right so p
subi of the time that's really extra
pair of paternity 1 minus p of the time
it's not but we've mclassified it does
that make some sense okay I know I've
gone over 30 seconds but if you and
there's only one way to observe a zero
Right? You they're not experienc and you
don't mclassify it. So this will be
better in a tree and then I'll let you
go. I should have done this before. We
think about first uh their nature
assigns a true value x of i equals 1 or
x sub i equals z right and the
probability of x of i equals 1 is pi and
the probability equals z is one minus
pi. We don't see that. Yeah. Um if we
observe um now there's the observation
model if x subi really equals zero there
are two things that can happen it can be
mclassified as a false positive at a
rate probability f and then we observe
xstar equals 1 - f at the time we
observe the true state equals z
and this is what all these terms are
what give us the top uh equation here
because it's all the ways we can observe
xar equals 1.
Does that make sense? Is that cool? I
think it's cool. All right, this is a
published paper. I'm gonna stop now.
Thanks for your attention. I hope this
was conceptually interesting and
motivating and inspires you to deal with
your own measurement problems. Uh, have
a good weekend.